COMP6721 Applied Artiﬁcial Intelligence (Winter 2023)
Assignment #1: State Space Search and Adversarial
Search
Due: 11:59PM, February 5th, 2023
State Space Search
Question 1 Consider the simpliﬁed Pac-Man problem shown in the ﬁgure below, which is
given as a 5 ×5 grid environment. In this version of the game, the Pac-Man
starts in the center of the grid, with 4 food items in the grid corners. The goal
is to eat the 4 food items while avoiding the ghost. An illegal state is one where
both the Pac-Man and the Monster are in the same location. For simplicity,
we assume that at each time step, the ghost moves ﬁrst then the Pac-Man.
Each agent can move one grid horizontally or vertically at each time step.
(a) Representthisproblemasasearchproblem(forthePac-Man)andchoosea
representation from the problem’s states. Each state should be represented
as a tuple. Note:if a certain attribute is not important when representing
a certain state(s), you can use X to indicate "not important".
(b) Write down the initial state (as shown in the image).
(c) Write down the goal state.
(d) What are the possible actions for the Pac-Man?
(e) Draw 2 levels (2 steps) of the state space for this problem showing all
possible states. Assume that the ghost is idle during these steps.
(f) Draw 1 level (1 Pac-Man step) of the state space for this problem showing
all possible states. Assume that the ghost takes a moving step before the
Pac-Man.
1(g) How many illegal states are there? Give 4 examples of illegal states.
Question 2 For each of the following graphs/trees, use the following search strategies to
show the states visited, along with the open and closed lists at each step (where
it applies). The value on each node reﬂects a heuristic, while the edges are
given cost values. You are required to explore the graph/tree starting from
node S until the goal node G is explored or until no more nodes can be visited.
Nodes of equal importance should be explored in an alphabetical
order (whenever the order is not speciﬁed by the algorithm itself,
use alphabetical order). .
Searchstrategies : BFS, DFS,IterativeDeepeningDFS, Uniformcostsearch,
Hill Climbing, Best-ﬁrst search, Algorithm A.
(a) S/leftrightline →"No Goal"
(b) S/leftrightline →G
2(c) S/leftrightline →G
Question 3 The map below shows the distances (in miles) between some major cities in the
US.YourfriendistravelingfromChicago(Start)toNewYork(Goal)andneeds
your help to ﬁnd the route with the shortest distance (in miles). Note: your
answers should be based on the costs given, no heuristic values are available.
(a) Fromthelistofsearchmethodsgiveninthepreviousquestion, whichsearch
method can you use to ﬁnd the route with the shortest distance?
(b) Applyyoursearchmethodofchoicetotheproblem. Showthestates(cities)
visited, alongwiththeopenandclosedlistsateachstep(ifitapplies). Stop
once the goal state (New York) is visited.
3(c) Based on your search method, what route should your friend follow? What
is the cost of this path?
Question 4 In this question, you will be asked to prove and design admissible and mono-
tonic (consistent) heuristics for varying problems.
(a) An example of an 8-puzzle is given in the ﬁgure below. The goal is to
move the tiles one at a time until the goal is reached, in which the tiles are
ordered. Given a state n, prove that the following heuristic for the 8-puzzle
is admissible:
h(n)=8
/summation.disp
i=1Manh (Ti,n,Ti,g) (1)
where Ti,nis position of tile iin state n,Ti,gis the position of tile iin the
goal state, and Manh (Ti,n,Ti,g)is the Manhattan Distance between tiles
Ti,nandTi,g.
(b) For the Pac-Man problem given in Question 1, design an admissible heuris-
ticthatgivesavalueforeachstate. Youcancompletelyignoretheexistence
of the ghost.
Adversarial Search
Question 1 For each of the following trees:
•Compute the minimax game values for all the given nodes.
•Explore the tree using Alpha-Beta pruning. Indicate all parts of the tree
that are pruned, and indicate the winning path or paths. For each node,
show the alpha/beta values throughout the process
•Re-draw the trees (with minimax values) by re-ordering the children of
each internal node (maintaining an equivalent tree) such that the pruning
is maximized.
4•Preform alpha-beta pruning again on the re-ordered trees and indicate
the diﬀerence in pruning (total number of nodes pruned compared to the
previous version of the tree).
(a) ..
(b) ..
(c) ..
Question 2 In the example below, you are the X player in a tic-tac-toe game, with 4 possi-
ble moves. For each of your possible moves, the O player has 3 possible moves.
5To evaluate a certain scenario, you use the following evaluation function:
value V=0
for allrows, columns, diagonals Rdo:
ifRcontains three Xsthen:
V=V+1000
else if Rcontains three Osthen:
V=V−1000
else if Rcontains two Xsthen:
V=V+100
else if Rcontains two Osthen:
V=V−100
else if Rcontains one Xthen:
V=V+10
else if Rcontains one Othen:
V=V−10
end if
end for
return V
Draw all the possible conﬁgurations following the actions of player X (4 con-
ﬁgurations) and player O (4 ×3 = 12 conﬁgurations). Evaluate the last layer
of conﬁgurations using the aforementioned evaluation function, and compute
the minimax game values for the rest of the nodes. Indicate the winning path.
Question 3 Ahmed and Soorena are involved in a big argument. The ﬁgures below show
two equivalent trees, A and B. Ahmed claims that the alpha-beta pruning in
tree A is maximized, while Soorena claims that the pruning is maximize in
tree B. Your help is needed! Which tree has the maximized pruning (more
nodes pruned)? Use alpha-beta pruning to ﬁnd the number of nodes pruned.
After declaring the winner between Ahmed and Soorena, you need to provide a
6justiﬁcation for the conclusion you reached. In your justiﬁcation, use the main
idea of ordering the nodes of a tree to get a maximum cutoﬀ.
* Disclaimer: Ahmed and Soorena will maintain full professionalism while
grading this question, regardless of who you declare as the winner ,.
Tree A:
Tree B:
7